[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
charlie state antanaga manchetti
our headlines today hopes for foreign
holidays the government announces plans
to reopen
international travel bottle daymakers
will have to pay for covet tests leading
to criticism from airports
and airlines
police respond with water cannon after
coming under attack in belfast
during another night of violence in
northern ireland
good morning rose is in full bloom at
the masters englishman justin rose was a
star performer on the opening day in
augusta
as he opened up a four-stroke lead and
is seven under par
and we'll be meeting the jockey at half
six who's preparing to take on the
sports elite as the grand national
returns tomorrow
she's hoping to become the first female
winner and a horse is trained by her mum
and roll up roll up we've got all the
fun of the fair good morning from
blackpool pleasure beach where they're
preparing to reopen on monday morning
for their 120 season
and somehow i've got the job of
testing the rides good morning we have
got some colder weather on the cards
once again over the next few days
some snow showers across scotland today
patchy rain further south
i'll be here all morning with all your
weather details
[Music]
good morning it's friday the 9th of
april our top story this morning plans
to reopen international travel for
holidaymakers from
england have been unveiled with a
requirement to pay for coronavirus tests
the government stopped short of saying
if foreign trips can resume next month
but has also
outlined a so-called traffic light
system which will be used to categorize
countries based on risk
let's take you through some of the
detail for places on the green
list travelers will be asked to take a
test before they return to england and
pay for a costly pcr
test typically 120 pounds
two days after arriving home now if
you're
coming to england from countries on the
amber list you'll be also asked to
self-isolate for 10 days and pay for a
pcr test on days two
and eight on return and passengers from
red list destinations will be required
to pay
for 10 days in a quarantine hotel if
those plans have been met with
widespread frustration by some
in the travel industry here's our
transport correspondent caroline davis
we may be dreaming of sunshine and
summer getaways
but would you pay around an extra
hundred pounds per person
when coming back from your trip overseas
i think it's very disappointing
the boss of easyjet isn't impressed at
this part of the government's plan
to reintroduce international travel in
england
i think it's a blow to to all travelers
who were
wishing to wanting to go and see friends
and families and and going on a holiday
this summer
and i think in particular the concern
why there are now
two test systems in what they call the
green category
today's report says that passengers
coming from the lowest risk
green rated countries will still need to
take one of the more expensive pcr tests
when they arrive back in england and pay
for it themselves
currently around 100 pounds each instead
the industry want to use the cheaper and
quicker lateral flow tests
the government says pcr testing will
allow them to monitor positive cases
and check for variants of concern the
report also says that if travel does go
ahead
countries which will be on the green
list will be announced in early may
there'll be a watch list for countries
at risk of being changed to amber
and there'll be a new consumer rights
for ticket refunds
the industry is already gearing up for
international travel on the 17th of may
whether that will happen won't be
confirmed either way until early next
month
the flight simulators here are in use 24
hours a day
with pilots yearning to get back to the
skies for pilots
we as a group are tremendously looking
forward to getting back in the air again
pilots don't want to be on the ground
any more than aircraft want to be on the
ground
and for us we are really trying to
respond to any pent-up demand so that
we're fully ready to go
when the government gives the green
light on certain routes in the future
this announcement is not the grand
reopening the industry was looking for
but after months of travel restrictions
the easing looks likely to take time
caroline davis bbc news yes we will find
out more about
the system and how it's intended it
should work we will be joined by the
transport secretary guard chaps that's
on breakfast here
at around 7 30 this morning if you have
any questions
let us know this morning we'll get more
detail then other news to bring you
there has been another night of writing
in belfast with petrol bombs fireworks
and stones thrown at police
officers used water cannon for the first
time in six years in an attempt to
restore order as james reynolds now
reports
in belfast the knight was lit up
this latest unrest came on the
nationalist side
not far from the wall separating the
city's two communities
the police responded with water cannon
the first time
they've done so in six years
the first minister says these scenes
have taken
northern ireland backwards
last night's clashes weren't on the same
scale as wednesday
where rioters on the loyalist side
hijacked
and firebombed a bus
some of those gathered were in their
early teens
far too young to remember the era of
troubles but the 1998 good friday
agreement
pledged to end for good
history has shown very very clearly in
relation to northern ireland
one side acting on its own whether it's
within northern ireland or between the
two governments or whatever
doesn't succeed it only ever succeeds to
bring peace or stability
when both sides are working together
that's going to require joint action by
governments it's going to require
the assembly and the executive working
really with a single voice to the
various parties that are there
we join the british the irish and the
northern
irish leaders in their calls for com
we remain as you have heard us say
before stead steadfast supporters
of a secure and prosperous northern
ireland in which all communities have a
voice
and all communities enjoy the gains of a
hard-won
peace this is something that the
president has spoken to
quite passionately in the past
the past itself is what overshadows this
unrest northern ireland's fractures now
reach its younger generation james
rollins
bbc news
from today everyone in england has
access to two
rapid coronavirus tests a week which can
provide results in around 30 minutes
the lateral flow kits will be available
at testing sites
pharmacies and through the post here's
our health correspondent dominic hughes
hi um can i pick up a box of lateral
flow tests is that possible
now available at your local pharmacy
lateral flow tests are the quick
and easy way to tell if you're ill with
coronavirus
they've already been rolled out in
schools and many workplaces
they're also available at testing
centers online or via work
and pharmacists say they can offer help
and advice if needed
when the time comes where tests need to
be accessed um
we're an obvious choice where you can go
and get a test
get a quick result and also if you've
got any questions about
the vaccine or the pandemic it can all
be answered in one setting
it takes only 30 minutes to get a result
from a lateral flow test which involves
swabbing the throat and nose
it's believed the test gives one false
positive in every thousand where someone
is wrongly identified as having been
infected with the virus
so people are being urged to follow up
with a more reliable pcr
test if they do return a positive result
extra testing is not without its critics
some argue it's a waste of money unless
people have more support to isolate when
they have to
but given more than a third of those who
have the virus show no
symptoms ministers argue that testing
remains an essential part of the
response to the virus
at this macclesfield pharmacy they are
already well into the rollout of the
second jab to those most at risk and
health experts believe it's this
combination
of vaccinations and testing that will
get us out of this pandemic
dominic hughes bbc news mackersfield
the uk's leading sports bodies are
backing the use of
vaccine passports and covert testing as
a way of getting
full crowds back in a joint letter to
the leaders of the major political
parties
the group says a certification process
could allow fans to return as quickly as
possible
it warns that the system must not be
discriminatory and
should protect privacy
the welsh government is speeding up the
easing of its covered restrictions as
investor levels continue
to drop gyms will be allowed to reopen
and people
from two households can bubble up to
meet indoors
this is from the third of may instead of
the 10th of may
the dates for reopening hospitality
industry have not changed
now muslims who observe the islamic holy
month of ramadan are being reassured
that receiving a coronavirus vaccination
will not
break their fast from monday evening
many will refrain from food and drink
during daylight hours harry farley has
this report the alabas
islamic center in birmingham is one of
many places of worship that has been
converted into a vaccine center
for now their focus has switched from
saving souls
to saving lives
there has been some debate among islamic
scholars
but the majority now say the kovid
vaccine does not
break the fast we know that a lot of
people a lot of muslims are a bit
concerned about having their
kovid vaccination during ramadan and
many people believe that having an
injection actually breaks the fast but
it doesn't at all
because it's not considered nutrition so
it's absolutely fine
to have the coveted vaccination while
we're fasting
ramadan will look different this year to
normal the british islamic medical
association has issued guidance
for how to celebrate safely
there have been fears about vaccine take
up among some ethnic minority groups
but there are signs initiatives like
this in birmingham are having an impact
we know that between january and march
there has been an increase in the uptake
of vaccines from the black
occasion and ethnic minority groups and
that's positive news
a lot of that is due to the grassroots
organizations and faith-based
organizations going into the communities
to dispel the myths and readdress those
concerns that the communities are having
but there's much work to be done and we
really need to try and make sure we
continue with this momentum
some vaccine sites will be staying open
late during ramadan so muslims can come
after they've eaten but the message from
nhs and islamic leaders is get the
jab even if you're fasting thank you so
much
ari foley bbc news
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news